DESCRIPTION OF FLEET DISPLAY

If you have not read the planets.txt file then go and read it. The
fleet display mechanism is identical and this file assumes you're
already "familiar" with the meaning of view, function, filter, marker,
flag, etc. etc.


PLANETS vs. FLEETS

The main difference between the two displays is that while Stars!
planetary reports contain (almost) all the relevant data for a decent
display, the fleet reports are missing some fundamental stuff, such as
EXACT fleet composition.

I have devised a method to provide the information to starana, but it
costs time, since it requires you to encode the fleet composition in
the fleet name. It also requires you to enter the ship design
information in the master file, to have starana know about things like
max fuel or max cargo. While this information is not, in general,
required to obtain a fleet display, there are some functions (those
dealing with specific designs or max cargo space, for example) who
REQUIRE the additional information.

I have tried to arrange things so that there are no "half-working"
functions. If you try to use one of the functions that require the
information without providing it then the result will be consistent:
e.g. ALL fleets get filtered, regardless of what you asked (so you can
notice that something's wrong).


FLEET DUPLICATES

If more that one fleet reports is given (typical in a team game) then
starana will have a hard time trying to figure out the duplicates (and
removing them). The basic idea used by starana is that a fleet is
identified by the couple owner+id number. It is then important not to
screw up this information. Basically this means that you must NOT
alter the #??? which appears at the end of the default fleet name. Use
whatever you want for the name, but keep that part intact, otherwise
starana will be unable to detect the duplicate and you'll see "weird"
fleets appear on the display.

Another problem: if you generate the report AFTER you've played the
turn, after you've had fun splitting/merging fleet, this will cause
your fleet ids to be altered and thus become inconsistent with the
reports given by your allies. If you need to have accurate displays of
the team fleets generate the report BEFORE you play the turn.  You can
then regenerate them when you're fine-tuning the shipping routes and
using starana's simulation capability to see how much minerals you
will have on your production worlds in 5 years.....


PROVIDING FLEET INFORMATION TO STARANA

There are two steps:
1) giving design information to starana.
2) altering the fleet name to give indication of the composition.

How the design information is given can be seen by looking at the
example file sa-complex.smf. It's the same thing as sa.smf, but all
the comments relative to the stuff explained in sa.smf has been
removed and the commented part is the "new" one, i.e. design
specification and fleet naming.

Go and read sa-complex.smf now, it'll take a short time.

Ok, now you can understand the rest... :)

Apart from all the useful information given in the design { .. }
specification there's one vital part: the composition abbreviation.  I
suggest to keep it SHORT, I usually use mnemonic things like SFX for
Super Fuel Xports or CoH for Change of Heart, etc.  You then use as a
fleet name a string which is a sequence of abbreviation and ship
numbers. For example "CoH2 SFX1 #132" to indicate 2 Change of Hearts
and one Super Fuel Xport. NOTE that you must not kill the #id number
in the process!!!
NOTE also that the abbreviation can't contain numbers/ Otherwise
starana will never be able to say when the abbreviation ends and when
the number of ships starts!!!

Ok, so this fleet naming looks extremely annoying. Trust me, it is :)
Actually it's less annoying than you think, for two reasons. I find
useful to use the abbreviations since they also tell ME what the fleet
composition is. "Destroyer+" doesn't say much about all the
layers/freighters/bombers/SFXs which may be flying with the
destroyers.  Also, to make life easier starana will check the
consistency of the number of ships and of the total fleet mass between
the report and the composition it got from the name, and complain
about all those fleet who don't match. The information is available in
the Fleet Analysis part of the report-log file.


FLEET INFORMATION "GENERATED" By STARANA

Starana uses the position and movement vector of enemy fleets to
determine the origin and destination of the fleet. In order to avoid
ridiculous results (e.g. scout will arive at XXX in 120 turns) it
limits the ETA of the fleets to the number of turns in the future
which was requested. For friendly fleets (whose destination is known)
only the origin determination is performed.


AVAILABLE FLEET FUNCTIONS

[I don't have time, select them and read the descriptions! :PP ]



ADDING FLEET FUNCTIONS

Identical to the planet case....
