AMIUBCLOSMAS 0.3 - 22 Nov 1998

or

Alberto's Most Incomplete, Undocumented and Badly Coded
Stars! Mapper, Analyzer and Simulator

(called "StarAna", as in STARs! ANAlyzer, by friends)


This is the "user guide", you should check:

- advert.txt for a simple list of what the program can do;

- install.txt for installation instructions;

- planets.txt for some information on how the planetary display
  really works.

- fleets.txt is the equivalent of planets.txt, but it applies to 
  fleet display.

- technicalia.txt for technical information about compilation,
  installation, technical details, hacking, etc. The normal user
  does not need to read that (that file it's not up-to-date, also!);



WHAT THIS PROGRAM IS

AMIUBCSMAS/StarAna is a program to:

- create maps of a Stars! game which are not available in the game
  using the data obtained from map/pla/fle files and any additional
  data that the user types in (e/g. planetary queues);

- perform a simulation of the planetary evolution for some years to
  analyze the mineral shortages, crossing of population filling
  thresholds, resource growth, etc. etc.

- analyze the situation offering some "suggestions" on pop/mineral
  shifting depending on the "types" assigned to the various planets.

The name AMIUBCSMAS contains some additional info:

Alberto's
        -> I wrote it :)
Most
        -> adds strength to the problems listed later
Incomplete
        -> the program is missing lots of features, and, even worse,
           has lots of non-tested features (example: queue management)
Undocumented
        -> there's almost no documentation
Badly Coded
        -> the C++ code is bad, period. This because the program was
           "born" as a simple clone of starmap and then was extended
           to include my old planetary simulator, which, in the
           origin, was not too bad. The process took one week-end and
           resulted in a program which runs but is quite chaotic.
Stars!
        -> works with Stars!
Mapper, Analyzer and Simulator
	-> ....were explained above


RUNNING STARANA

WIN95 QUICK START: create a shortcut to "starana" and put it on your
desktop.  Click on it to obtain a file selector asking you for the
master file to use. Starana can also be started by passing to it the
name of the master file, so you can create a shortcut which
automatically invokes it on the master file of the game you are
playing, or just associate starana to .smf files.

More information: Starana is born as a command-line run program, and
it accepts a couple of switches to alter its behavior:

-v run in "fully visual" mode. This mode is suited if you want to
   click on it from windows, it will ask for a file and report errors
   in dialogs. It's the default mode on win95.

-a use no graphics, just do the simulation and exit.

Usually when simulating you don't care at all about the map (see the
example sim.smf) and you will then run starana from a shell with the
command:

starana -a filename.smf

and then use something to read the report-log file.

In linux I keep a shell open and run from it, and you can do the same
from a MS-DOS prompt. The advantage is that should anything "real bad"
occur you can see error messages given by libraries in the window.
I usually run from shell in linux, but I use a shortcut in windows.



USING AMIUBCSMAS/STARANA

Using the program includes three separate steps:

- generating the input files in the appropriate format, either by
  typing them in (if you want to run a simulation), converting
  map/pla/fle files with the perl scripts found in perl/, or relying
  on the auto-conversion performed by starana itself;
  IMPORTANT: the "auto-conversion" ONLY works with patch 'i' improved
  report files. The perl script is UNABLE to handle the 2.6i files
  (due to the screwed header) and then you must use auto-conversion.

- running the program to generate the report-log file which includes
  the checks/simulation/analysis;

- playing with the graphical and report windows to see the various map
  representations and the simulation results.


FORMAT OF THE INPUT FILE

The format of the input files is quite complex, in order to allow most
stuff to be given to the program with a human-readable syntax.  Unless
you want to perform some special function (e.g. planetary simulations)
you only need to create a small "master file" which contains the data
that the program can't obtain from the Stars! reports. Racial
descriptions are a good example and they usually are 90% of the data
you need to write in the master file.

The full description of the language is found in technicalia.txt.

The simplest thing (which is what I do BTW :), is to just copy the
example file and change it, inserting my race(s) and all the
additional information which is needed. Go in the examples/
subdirectory and look at sa.smf, which is the master file for the
starana demo game. I have put a lot of comments in the file to explain
what things do, so you can change things as you go.

The typical master file contains the following stuff:

- universe definition (name, year, etc.)
- include of universe report to define planet names/positions
- races' definitions (PRT, LRT, factories, habitability, tech, etc).
  The full racial description is useful only if you have the report
  from that race and you plan to do a simulation with it. For "enemy"
  races you can just put in everything you know, leaving out any
  missing information (a default is assumed equal to Humanoid race).
  The racial description also contains ship designs/object description
  to be used in queues/fleet handling.
- include of planet/fleet files to get the real data. You must define
  the "source" of the data before the include.

Again, rather than typing in an example I suggest you to take a look
in examples/ at the file sa.smf.
After having read sa.smf you can have a look at the more complete
sa-complex.smf. This example file is for the same universe, but it
includes all the ship design information needed to properly handle
fleets.


PLAYING WITH THE MAP DISPLAY

When the map appears on-screen you can play with it in several ways.
You can use key shortcuts (see list below) or hit the right mouse
button to bring up the map control window.


- Map Control Window

This window is the "primary" window for controlling the map display.
It includes buttons to zoom in and out, scroll around, reset to full
view as well as setting the type of background (only 2 available) the
"how many years in the future" to see and the scanner efficiency.

"Redraw" will force a redraw of the map, while "auto-redraw" (which is
on by default) specifies that ANY modification to the map will force a
redraw instantly. You might want to turn auto-redraw off for
particularly slow display functions.

In the lower part you have a list of all the races in the game. The
"current viewpoint" is marked by a white circle around it. The
"viewpoint" is the race used for several calculations (for example
habitability). You can choose enemy races as viewpoints, but unless
you provide some information in the master file you'll get nothing
useful (the program should not crash, since races are "always" defined
to be Humanoids if you don't provide any information...).

By right-clicking on the race name you can bring up the racial report
window, which contains information about the specified race.

The map control window also gives access to additional windows /
operations.

Two buttons are available for the planetary display control: a newbie
user is STRONGLY advised to use the "list" function. You can play with
the editor, but unless you have read (and understood) planets.txt
you won't be able to obtain anything beyond the simpler displays.
Reread the above with "fleet" at the place of "planet" for an
explanation of the two buttons immediately to the right... :)

There's a nice "quit" button, in the lower right corner, too....

 
- Planetary view list
  (Fleet view list windows is identical)

This window is the simplest interface to planetary displays. It gives
you a list of the available planetary view functions. Just click on
the name of the one you'd like to activate to have the map redrawn
with the new setting.

Some buttons at the bottom provide extra power:
"load" loads up additional displays, adding them to the list
"save" saves the entire list to a file
"export" saves the selected entry to a file, appending it if the
         file already exists. You can pick you favorites and then
         mail them to your friends :)
         [Note that these file are pure ASCII text, so you can transfer
          them around with no problems.]
"rename" renames a list entry to your favorite name/language. Make
         sure you SAVE your changes as it doesn't happen automatically.

Somehow more "advanced"

"clone" creates a copy of the selected function and selects it. This
        is when you want to edit a function without killing the old
        one....
"edit"  opens the editor to modify the function (same as the
        map control button).
"delete" deletes the selected view. NOTE since starana needs at least
         one view you will not be able to delete the last one.
       

- Planetary function editor
  (Fleet function editor windows is identical)

Allows you to alter the planetary functions used for the current
planetary display. Read planets.txt (or fleets.txt).

Clicking on the number brings up the list of functions used, while
clicking on the name opens a menu of all the available functions.  You
can control mode with the choice which is below the description and
set the flag mask. You can enter numeric values for the 10 function
parameters.
NOTE: the display (and function used list) are not updated until you
select another function or hit "apply". "Cancel" will undo the changes
you have done to the function currently displayed.


- Racial report window(s)

The racial report window is a tabbed folder containing the information
about the race. A good part of it is the stuff you typed in in the
master file. :)
The folders are:
 - race design
	General information about the race, as you would expect
	in the Stars! Race Wizard.
 - report-log
	Analysis/check/simulation messages relative to the race.
 - simulation
	Simulation graphs.
 - designs
 - objects
	Race's ship/starbase designs and other object costs.
 - filtering
	Filtering of messages (to decide what type of messages you
	want to read in the report browsers). Note that if you want
	the changes to apply to the current race you have to re-select
	it to force an update of the report-log folder.


- Planet status display

This window is not accessed from the map control window, but it
appears automatically if you left-click on the map. Its objective is
to give information about the planet you clicked on (or near to).  Any
Stars! player can probably recognize at first sight most of the
information contained there. You can pop-up a second one by holding
control when you left-click on the map. The second one is relevant for
packeting calculations.

From top to bottom it contains:

Planet name, '(HW)' if it's a home world and then #xxx with xxx being
the Stars! id number. On the right you then have some useless
information such as the x/y position and the "planet type" which is
available only for planets owned by races with the do_analysis flag.

Just below you have a line with 3 "black boxes" and a number. Let's
start from the number: it's the report age.

The 3 boxes contain the names of the owner, authoritative data source
and trusted data source. To explain what this means we'll need a
little digression on.........

........data sources: authoritative, trusted, etc.

All the data which is subject so "personal interpretation" is stored
in starana for ALL the data sources. Ah, a "data source" is a race. :)
This leads to a table of up to 16 population values, starbase types,
mineral concentrations, etc. etc. If the OWNER of the planet is the
same as the SOURCE than the race is considered to be the
"authoritative" source for the planet data.  The authoritative source
can set some additional information that the others can't set. After
the data from all the races has been loaded the program checks who has
the highest reliability and chooses who to "trust". This defines the
TRUSTED source for that planet, and decides whose data you'll see on
the maps and in the planet status display.  Note that trusted and
authoritative MIGHT differ, in that case I don't dare to think what
happens to the planetary simulation. BTW you probably won't be
flagging for analysis races which you don't trust as allies, since
without the report files from them you'll constantly get crappy
simulation. REAL crappy. (Anyway, it may work to compute the planetary
population growth, if you know your enemies's growth rate, of course).

Going down you have now the population and starbase frames.  The
population frame gives the current population, it also provides some
additional information, such as population filling (color changes
according to region) and population growth.

The starbase frame contains the starbase design name, damage %, gate
characteristics and mass driver statistics. They all have the usual
meaning.  For the mass driver you only have the current warp and not
the rating, since the reports only contain this.

Then you have the installations box: the factory/mine display works
like this:

Factories  xxx / yyy / zzz

Where xxx is how many you have now, zzz is the maximum and yyy is the
difference between how many you have now and the maximum amount which
can be operated by your colonists. Negative means you can build more
factories/mines, positive means you have some unused ones.

The line below the installations box contains the planet's total
resource output with (between parenthesis) the resources sent to
research. The routing destination is on the right.

You then have the mineral report. It works almost as in Stars!: you
have three horizontal bars which correspond to the three minerals.
For every mineral you have the "current amount + amount mined".  At
the extreme right you have the mineral concentration.  
You can control the scale used in for the mineral bars by changing it
in the small menu available in the upper left corner. The possibilities
are:

- logarithmic: this scale works differently from Stars!, first of all
it's a logarithmic scale: the scale starts at 10 kT (you get nothing
when you have < 10 kT). The big ticks are at 10 (at the left), then
100, 1000, 10000 and 100000 kT (at the extreme right). Between two big
ticks you have 10 small ones corresponding to multiples of the one on
the left: in the 1000->10000 section you have ticks at
2000,3000,4000,..etc...,9000.

- multilinear: the scale is separated in 3 sections, the first goes
from 0 to 1000, the second from 1000 to 10000 and the third from
10000 to 100000.

- numbers: a linear scale as in Stars! The number is the maximum
amount shown and the scale starts at 0.

As in Stars!, the bright colored part is the current amount while the
darker one is the amount mined. Additionally you have a bright
vertical bar which corresponds to the amount which will be present
next year, taking into account not just mining, but also shipping
(adds) and production (subtracts).

In the upper right part you have the "object multiple" calculation.
The menu allows you to choose an object (predefined one or anything
you included in the master file, in the race section), it then
displays how many you can build before running out of ironium,
boranium, germanium (the 3 colored figures). The fourth number is how
many you can build (assuming you don't run out of minerals) with the
resources that the planet is giving.

Example:
	Factory   ++++ ++++ 75  25.9

This means that given the current ironium you can build infinite
factories (of course, building a factory does not require
ironium....), same with boranium. You can build 75 of them with the
current germanium and you can build 25.9 per turn given the current
resource output.

Below you have the habitability display. First, the planet values for
the owner and for the current race viewpoint. The three values are:
habitability now, habitability when terraformed, habitability when
terraformed with the best terraforming technology you'll ever have
(either 15/15/15 or 30/30/30 if you don't have or have TT), you can
consider it a "long term habitability".

The horizontal bars are, again, quite similar to Stars!, the
differences being that you have the central half of your hab range in
bright green and the outer half in darker green. Then if you have
terraforming tech you have a yellow section which indicates a range
which can become "green" if you do the terraforming. Outside you have
red.
Four markers appear on every horizontal bar, a diamond indicating the
current planetary stat and a long vertical bar indicating the original
stat. An horizontal bar (identical to Stars') which indicates how much
your terraforming ability can influence the stat. You also have a
small vertical bar which is the terraforming that you can perform at
maximum tech.

At the bottom you have a button to access the information obtained
from the simulation (and written in the report-log file).
[yes, the other buttons are for the moment non-operational]

MISSING INFO IN PLANET STATUS WINDOW: production queue (this one is a mess)


KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS

While in the map display window you can access several functions
directly with keys (note: 'r' means r, while 'R' means shift-r).
Note: the map window must be selected, they won't work in the other
windows.

keypad
	moves the map around as the arrows in map control window.
	Additionally 'enter' is redraw and '+' and '-' zoom in/out.
	Don't forget that you MUST have defined max_zoom in the input
        file for this to work. max_zoom-1 indicates how many times you
        can type '+', basically.

r R
	change the current race viewpoint (cycle).

v V
	change the current planetary view (cycle).

c C
	change the current fleet view (cycle) (mnemonic: left of
	the planet views).

f F
	increase/decrease the "years in the future" value.

s S
	increase/decrease by 10% the scanner efficiency. 0% corresponds
	to 2%, useful to spot 98% cloaked fleets....

p
	toggle open/close the planet view list window

o
	toggle open/close the fleet view list window (mnemonic: left of
	the planet views).

e
	toggle open/close the planet display editor window

w
	toggle open/close the fleet display editor window (again, left
	of its planet counterpart)

m
	toggle open/close the map control window (same as right-click)

a
	toggle alliances on/off (as the button in map control).

F1-F12
	select the 1st....12th planet view and redraw.

CTRL F1-F12
	select the 1st....12th fleet view and redraw.


Ah, if you need a screen shot you must use an external program. I am
considering the introduction of a key to save the map, it will be
probably PBM as it's awfully easy to implement.



MISSING STUFF IN THIS VERSION

There still are a problems and missing features.

- All the cute +/- thing in queue has never been tested, so it
probably doesn't work. Also, you must type in all the queues, as
there's no way to read it from the pla file. I won't even consider
using the "first object in queue" given there, since it's completely
useless.

- Specifying a new "planetary power" formula to generate a map display
is something which is needed. Right now you must edit and recompile.

- The whole "controlled space" thing sucks. The algorithm is too slow
and completely idiotic (it does the computation for EVERY point, no
coherence is used). I should rewrite it as a boundary tracing
algorithm, or hierarchical subdivision (quadtree). Also, it should be
modified to allow use of any of the "planetary power" formulae used
for single-value planetary map display.

- Information cross-check. The reliability value is almost useless.  A
decay based on report_age, as well as cross-check of the information
between the different sources should be included, in order to spot
"cheating allies".

- a nice context-sensitive help would be nice :)

- the whole program should be rewritten in something more like
"correctly designed C++" rather than "hack together C-like stuff."
